Elliot, thanks for joining us today.
So we have Elliot Prakta with us, and it's an honor to have you here spending some time with us
talking about the Elliot Wave principle and your history and your personal background on that.
So, I mean, before we go into the more depth of Elliot Wave,
if someone would be new to that kind of analysis,
how would you describe Elliot Wave in simple sentences?
Well, okay, I think the simplest way to understand it
is it's a description of the price patterns that unfold over and over again in financial markets.
So Elliot Wave theory is really the study of these price patterns.
So you could imagine that understanding the way these patterns behave
might be of use to you if you're a trader or an investor.
If we go back to the early 1930s when Elliot Wave theory was developed,
can you give us a bit of the backdrop?
How did the connection happen between the original...
Now, let me rephrase this again. Sorry.
Let's look back to the early 1930s when the Elliot Wave theory was developed for his time.
How did the connection happen between your father and the person that originally developed it?
Well, the person who originally developed Elliot Wave theory was R.N Elliot, Ralph Nelson Elliot,
and he was an accountant.
And he actually became ill and was bedridden for a long period of time.
And during that time, he spent hours and hours every day pouring over market charts,
and he kept noticing these recurring patterns in price and time.
And those patterns eventually became the Elliot Wave principle, which he later wrote about.
And he actually used the theory to pinpoint the moment at which the Great Depression,
the Great Crash of 29, ended.
And he started telling people that they should be buying the market at that time.
So he put it into practice quite readily from that point.
My father, when he came across the Elliot Wave theory, believe it or not, the only way at that time,
which was, I believe that was in the 70s, to read about the theory was on microfilm,
because they didn't even have full books.
So the information about it that R.N Elliot had written about was almost lost to history.
And, of course, he had prints created from the microfilm and, of course, popularized it a lot during the 80s.
So we almost didn't recover this theory.
When did Elliot Wave theory really blow up?
I mean, everybody on Wall Street knows Elliot Wave theory.
The heyday when it was most popular was in the 1980s.
My father had predicted a repeat of the roaring 20s right around the late 70s and early 80s,
which, of course, went against the consensus at that time, which was mostly doom and gloom,
which is completely understandable when you have interest rates at 18 percent and just very scary, you know, runaway inflation.
I think that was the worst, I think it's the worst inflationary period in U.S. history, aside from maybe the continental, I guess.
So you talked about your father making that public as a book and then going into this period where it gets known everywhere.
How do you feel now, a generation after that, taking that forward?
Or how has your father convinced you that you should continue that road?
How does your first name relate to the...
Yes, my first name.
Well, it was either going to be Elliot or it was going to be Fibbo.
I'm really glad I got with Elliot.
Maybe if we had a dog, we'd call it Fibbo, I guess.
But, no, for me, my background is in computer science and engineering.
I really, growing up, I was never interested in finance at all, as most kids aren't, right?
If you're interested in many other things.
I tried with my daughter.
But, of course, you know, you grow up.
And then the thing that really caught my attention was the crash of 2008.
And that was when it just struck me that financial analysis has a big impact.
And for me, it was beyond just a portfolio or numbers or even thinking about my own investments.
It was more of a visceral feeling of, wow, these cycles in the market, they affect people in a very dramatic way.
And I could see it going to work and people would be all depressed sitting at their offices back in 2008.
Meanwhile, I'm like, you know, I'm 4x short the banks right now.
I'm loving this, but I'm not going to say anything to anybody about it, you know, who's unhappy with what's happening.
So that was a big hook for me.
Like, oh, this is useful.
And how should traders use Elliott Wave Analysis in practice?
Is it a forecasting tool, a risk management tool, or a way to map out probabilities?
Well, I think you pretty much laid all three out.
You did a great job.
This is or this.
I was like, yes to all three.
You know, I mean, historically, it's mainly been a long-term forecasting tool.
Personally, I like the intermediate time frame a little more.
And for that reason is the second reason you mentioned, which is limiting your risk.
Because everyone I know who is a successful trader, I'm sure there are exceptions out there.
But the ones that I know personally, their number one thing is limiting the risk when they're wrong.
And that's what Elliott Wave Theory does a really good job of doing, is it tells you precise points in time where, if you have a thesis,
where that thesis will be validated and where that thesis will be invalidated.
So you can try to keep your risk as small as possible.
So when I started at Bear Stearns in the early 90s, I remember, you know, taking tickets, get them time-stemmed.
It was all still very basic.
How did technology change the functionality of Elliott Wave?
Or are there no big changes compared to the 70s or 80s?
That's an interesting question.
And when I talked today at the FSC, I mentioned at the end of my presentation a point about that exactly,
which is that we found that the behavior of Elliott Waves really hasn't changed in spite of the technology.
In fact, the term I use is it's a stationary model.
And what I mean by stationary is that the behavior or the properties of these patterns don't really change through time.
In fact, the behavior of Elliott Waves, as far as I can tell from my work, is the same today as it was 200 years ago.
So we think markets, despite all the technology, there's still a human being behind that's calling the shots,
even if you have, say, a fully quantitative model that's automated.
At the end of the day, there's still a person who developed the model,
a person who's still running or deciding when to stop the model if they don't like the results.
So it's still, I think, humans are still the drivers of what happens in the market.
And I think Elliott Waves are a reflection of that psychology.
There's a great saying on Wall Street, if you follow the herd, all you see is asses.
How do you avoid being part of the herd at important turning points in the market,
looking at using an Elliott Wave theory?
Well, I think what Elliott Waves do for you, and I would say technical analysis in general,
Elliott Waves and cycles as well, is that they tune your mind to think about and anticipate change in the market.
So instead of focusing on the fact that the market has been going up for a really long time
and then, say, just extrapolating that infinitely into the future,
you're always thinking that this trend really could turn at any moment and become a different kind of a trend.
So it's just a different way of thinking.
And when you're thinking that way, you're not going to be as caught off guard
when there's a sudden change in the market environment,
you know, like when bond yields go from zero or in some cases negative
and suddenly the highest yields in 20 years,
you know, those are the kinds of things that catch a lot of people off guard.
But if you look at, for example, the wave counts that Elliott Wave International has been producing,
you know, they anticipated that change in interest rates before it happened.
So, you know, you're not always going to be right,
but at least you will be in tune and ready for those junctures to occur.
Are there differences between applying Elliott Wave theory on equities, bonds, currencies, cryptocurrencies?
There are some differences.
With the E-Wave software in particular that I developed,
I treat all markets the same, actually.
But there's certainly an argument to be made that some of them do trade a little bit differently.
But I'm always wary of curve fitting.
You know, I don't want to bifurcate the training data I use for the program to too many different buckets.
You know, the more general that I can treat things, the more robust I think it is.
But there are definitely differences.
And one example that I gave earlier today was that in commodity markets,
you tend to get these large fifth-wave blow-off moves more often than you get in, say, equities.
So we do know that there are some differences.
Let's also get back to the technology topic.
And you mentioned E-Wave already a little bit in your mentioning.
Because I think, I mean, you mentioned we go from microfilm to books.
This is what your father led the way.
But I think now you add another layer on top of that, because you mentioned E-Wave technologies.
So these days we have the computer power to detect patterns, as you introduced.
Elliot waves are patterns in price structure.
So, and I think a challenge always was with Elliot waves.
Someone needs to sit in front of a price chart and make a decision where to put this pattern.
And it's always easy to see a pattern after the fact.
But the challenge is to see it quasi before it happens or before it is completed.
I mean, that's where we want to use Elliot wave for.
And I think you are now pushing this into a kind of computer-automated, supported way,
which is, I think, another big step which is required.
Because every Elliot wave analyst might come up with a different count.
So how do you see that?
And what is E-Wave maybe solving in that context?
Yes, well, that's a lot to unpack there all in one question.
So I'm not sure which part of the question to answer first here.
Okay, where do we start?
Maybe I'll start with creating E-Waves.
We could start in the beginning here before we get on to the other part of that.
But E-Waves is a project that actually started a long time ago.
It started in 1986.
So it's been in development for a while.
I say that, but that's not entirely true.
The version 1 was created in 86.
And then it more or less was not really used for a long time or developed on.
And the reason, if you used computers back in the 80s, you might have some idea that they didn't have a lot of horsepower behind them.
And it actually takes a tremendous amount of computing power to do these Elliot wave analysis.
Even today, and I've got a really souped-up computer that I use for it, and even then it's a lot slower than I would like.
So there's just, there's a lot of computing power that's necessary.
So I would say it wasn't until more recently that we really had the power we needed to be able to run the program well.
And, of course, what I've been doing is I rewrote the entire thing and modernized it, you know, and kind of brought it up into the modern era, so to speak.
And so that's the E-Waves origin story.
But I think you have included a way to find, isolate, and detect counts and wave patterns right now.
So you don't need to do it manually.
So E-Wave is doing that for you, right?
Yes. I mean, E-Waves does do the wave count.
It's an automated process, so you don't have to sit there by hand and sketch out the wave pattern,
which, like you said earlier, can be very tricky because when you're looking at a chart,
you're going to have partial patterns most of the time.
And that's why, in my presentation earlier, I wanted to show that particular example where we had the market coiling up
and it looked like it was a triangle, and we're going to burst up out of the triangle, right,
which is a common pattern, and the market did the exact opposite because that was actually part of a partial pattern.
It was not a finished triangle.
It was part of yet another pattern.
So there's all these kind of very tricky situations you get into with partial patterns.
So it's been quite a challenge to develop the program to deal with the inherent partialness of the data we're working with,
but that's why the program does a lot of extrapolation work, like I showed, where it can try to complete the pattern in its head.
So it's always kind of imagining, okay, if this is a partially formed pattern, where might the market go next and what would that look like?
Does it remove the subjective decision-making of the analyst, which we had before,
which made me crazy following different Elliott Wave experts showing different counts?
I think that cannot be the case.
There are clear rules published in the book.
So why can they come up with different outcomes?
So does E-Wave now solve that issue or not?
Yeah.
Okay, so there are, of course, rules that do constrain the wave counts that are legal,
as well as the wave counts that are illegal, so to speak.
And that's one common baseline that all analysts should follow.
I've seen many blog posts where they obviously don't know about the rules,
and you get some really weird-looking counts.
But even at that basis, okay, that's a nice foundation for the Elliott Wave theory.
But then there's, of course, the area where probability comes into play and guidelines come into play.
And when you get to that area of the theory, where you have different alternative wave counts
or different ways that are legal of labeling a chart and you're trying to pick between them,
that's where you get different analysts that may disagree.
Now, I think there are times in the market where everything kind of lines up,
and you'll see many analysts all of a sudden agreeing, and I love when that happens.
So my answer to you is when you see analysts disagreeing, as long as they're good analysts,
what it's telling you is that there are some alternative interpretations with a different message that are going on.
So maybe the best thing to do is to just do this for a little bit and say, okay, the message is not clear.
Very similar to the cycles work you were talking about,
where you say sometimes there are cycles going in different directions,
and the right answer is to be neutral.
So I would say it's the same with Elliott Waves.
So what we've done with E-Waves, of course, that a human can't do is that instead of using guidelines,
you know, I use the word guidelines because that's what we're all familiar with,
but E-Waves, the program itself does not have guidelines.
You know, the guidelines, so to speak, that I refer to are just part of what the model,
how the model learns the behavior of the patterns, which is an automatic learning process that it does.
But we can, of course, study the resulting model and kind of see, hey, does it,
is it behaving in a way that conforms to the original guidelines that Aaron Elliott wrote about?
And like I said before, we've, for the most part, have found that it's in agreement with his observations.
Is there any cross-checking taking place between the results of E-Waves
and the official Elliott Wave International interpretation of what the markets are doing?
Cross-checking?
Yeah, that you compare and you see if there are differences.
You know, to be honest, we've tried to have various analysts follow the same course.
But if you've ever worked with analysts before, you know that they each have their own opinion.
And so people do much better work when they're allowed to just use their own opinion.
And they have access to E-Waves and they'll refer to it.
And so I a lot of times see, oh, that's the count we're producing from the system.
And they're talking about it, you know, in their work.
And I love to see that.
Maybe in simple terms, very often retail investors ask me, you know,
it looks really super interesting, where do I actually start?
How can I get a good understanding of what it actually does?
How would you recommend somebody that is interested in working with Elliott Wave Theory
actually get into it and get started?
Getting started.
Okay, yeah, the E-Wave software, in my opinion,
is for people who already know a bit about Elliott Wave Theory.
If you're brand new and you just want to get a grip,
then I'd actually recommend going to ElliottWave.com.
And we have a lot of educational material on there.
We've got a lot of books.
We've got a section called Waveopedia,
where they explain all the core Elliott Wave patterns and their behavior.
A lot more elaborate detail than, you know, what I did today.
And then they also have a service that I like called Trader's Classroom.
And that's really a very introductory service,
where it's really focused on education and teaching people how to do it yourself,
as opposed to, say, a forecasting service or other types of services
that, you know, assume you know a little bit more about it.
I mean, there are all kinds of different market regimes, right?
And you guys went through every possibility environment over the decades.
Looking at 2026, you know,
stocks are going parabolic in the semiconductor area.
Yes, yes.
I mean, is there anything that, you know,
that you specifically look at at the moment
that makes you nervous about the market
or any change in regime that is happening right now?
Well, what I did say in my presentation today
was we went through the wave count that E-Waves is doing from 2009.
Now, I only showed it through 2020,
but that was enough to show you that we've got one, two, three, four,
which means that I believe we've been in the final fifth wave from the 2020 lows.
And, of course, this is manifested in a lot of interesting investor behavior.
Like I had mentioned, the NFT craze that happened,
that's been in this fifth wave.
And a big characteristic of fifth waves
is that if you compare them, especially against wave three,
you know, wave threes tend to have,
I'm trying to think of the right way to phrase this,
like a thickness to them,
like the breadth of wave three is very thick.
So a lot of stocks participate in the move.
And then in fifth waves,
almost always you get a big divergence with wave three
where the market becomes very thin.
And that's what we've seen
where the big tech names are driving stocks higher,
whereas the median stock,
I think, has actually been declining for quite some time.
Now, that said, fifth waves,
while they're generally shorter than thirds,
that's not always the case.
I showed one example in gold where it was quite extended.
So fifth waves can be quite large,
but no matter how large they are,
they're still the final wave in the sequence.
Other than the market breadth,
which is pretty weak at the moment,
is there something like, you know,
a canary in the mine,
like an asset class that usually pre-runs equities
or that can give you kind of like a signal
that the market overall is starting to weaken?
Well, I'm tempted to say yes,
because I see that kind of thing all the time.
But at the same time, with Elliott Wave Theory,
I've also noticed that it's often best
to treat every market independently,
because those kinds of correlations
come at certain times,
and then they go at other times.
But nevertheless,
what I'm tempted to say here
is Bitcoin is something to watch.
It's moved in lockstep with the NASDAQ.
So contrary to what some people say,
where they say, you know,
it's a safe haven asset,
if you look at its behavior,
you'll notice it behaves more like a risk-on asset,
you know, moving fairly much,
highly correlated with the NASDAQ.
And so, of course, right now we have a large divergence
where the NASDAQ 100 has been just skyrocketing higher,
and the crypto people are not participating.
Now, that divergence could be erased,
of course, if Bitcoin moves higher,
but if it persists, you know,
maybe that's the tech version
of the Dow Theory sell signal, you could say.
Maybe it's the Dow Theory 2.0.
Elliott, before we conclude,
maybe final question
or try to give us some secrets.
I mean, Elliott Wave patterns have different patterns.
What is your favorite pattern you prefer?
I know we talked about the impulse pattern,
one, two, three, four, five.
So, but there are more than that.
And I think, do you have a favorite pattern?
Oh, goodness.
Yeah, that one's tough to answer.
But no, I think it would probably be the flat pattern.
That was, it's just the one that fools the most people.
Because it's the market starts to go down,
and then it moves up to a brand new high,
and it looks so much like the continuation of a trend.
But like I said, if you study very carefully
what's happening under the Elliott Wave model,
it's a corrective move down and a corrective move up.
And then the market has a very swift,
oftentimes, crash at that point,
and it catches everybody off guard.
So I like that because it's the pattern
that causes the most damage.
So maybe it's a bit of schadenfreude on my part
that I just love the flat.
Thank you, Elliott.
Thank you so much.
I appreciate your time.
Thank you.
Thank you.
